[docs, bigquery] tutorial and reference guide (#12452)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/integrations/bigquery/reference.mdx

description: Store your Dagster assets in BigQuery
---

# dagster-bigquery integration reference

This reference page provides information for working with [`dagster-bigquery`](/\_apidocs/libraries/dagster-bigquery) features that are not covered as part of the [Using Dagster with BigQuery tutorial](/integrations/bigquery/using-bigquery-with-dagster).

- [Providing credentials as configuration](#providing-credentials-as-configuration)
- [Selecting specific columns in a downstream asset](#selecting-specific-columns-in-a-downstream-asset)
- [Storing partitioned assets](#storing-partitioned-assets)
- [Storing tables in multiple schemas](#storing-tables-in-multiple-schemas)
- [Using the BigQuery I/O manager with other I/O managers](#using-the-bigquery-io-manager-with-other-io-managers)
- [Storing and loading PySpark DataFrames in BigQuery](#storing-and-loading-pyspark-dataframes-in-bigquery)
- [Using Pandas and PySpark DataFrames with BigQuery](#using-pandas-and-pyspark-dataframes-with-bigquery)
- [Executing custom SQL commands with the BigQuery resource](#executing-custom-sql-commands-with-the-bigquery-resource)

---

## Providing credentials as configuration

> In most cases, you will authenticate with Google Cloud Project (GCP) using one of the methods outlined in the [GCP documentation](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/provide-credentials-adc). However, in some cases you may find that you need to provide authentication credentials directly to the BigQuery I/O manager. For example, if you are using Dagster Cloud Serverless you cannot upload a credential file, so must provide your credentials as an environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most cases, you will authenticate with Google Cloud Project (GCP) using one of the methods outlined in the [GCP documentation](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/provide-credentials-adc). However, in some cases you may find that you need to provide authentication credentials directly to the BigQuery I/O manager. For example, if you are using [Dagster Cloud Serverless](/dagster-cloud/deployment/serverless) you cannot upload a credential file, so must provide your credentials as an environment variable.
```

Add a link to Serverless here?

You can provide credentials directly to the BigQuery I/O manager by using the `gcp_credentials` configuration value. The BigQuery I/O manager will create a temporary file to store the credential and will set `GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS` to point to this file. When the Dagster run is completed, the temporary file is deleted and `GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS` is unset.

To avoid issues with newline characters in the GCP credential key, you must base64 encode the key. For example, if your GCP key is stored at `~.gcp/key.json` you can base64 encode the key by using the following shell command:

```shell
cat ~.gcp/key.json | base64
```

> Then you can set an environment variable in your Dagster deployment (for example `GCP_CREDS`) to the encoded key and provide it to the BigQuery I/O Manager:

Reviewer: Include a link to the env vars guide here? `/guides/dagster/using-environment-variables-and-secrets`

> Then you can set an environment variable in your Dagster deployment (for example `GCP_CREDS`) to the encoded key and provide it to the BigQuery I/O Manager:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then you can set an environment variable in your Dagster deployment (for example `GCP_CREDS`) to the encoded key and provide it to the BigQuery I/O manager:
```

        )
    }
)
def sepal_data(iris_sepal: pd.DataFrame) -> pd.DataFrame:
    iris_sepal["Sepal area (cm2)"] = (
        iris_sepal["Sepal length (cm)"] * iris_sepal["Sepal width (cm)"]
    )
    return iris_sepal
```

In this example, we only use the columns containing sepal data from the `IRIS_DATA` table created in [Step 2: Create tables in BigQuery](/integrations/bigquery/using-bigquery-with-dagster#store-a-dagster-asset-as-a-table-in-bigquery) of the [Using Dagster with BigQuery tutorial](/integrations/bigquery/using-bigquery-with-dagster). Fetching the entire table would be unnecessarily costly, so to select specific columns, we can add metadata to the input asset. We do this in the `metadata` parameter of the `AssetIn` that loads the `iris_data` asset in the `ins` parameter. We supply the key `columns` with a list of names of the columns we want to fetch.

When Dagster materializes `sepal_data` and loads the `iris_data` asset using the BigQuery I/O manager, it will only fetch the `Sepal length (cm)` and `Sepal width (cm)` columns of the `IRIS.IRIS_DATA` table and pass them to `sepal_data` as a Pandas DataFrame.

---

> ## Storing partitioned assets

Reviewer: What would you think about putting the subsections in this section into tabs? ex:

```
## Storing partitioned assets

[intro as you have it]

<TabGroup>
<TabItem name="Static partitioned assets">
</TabItem>
<TabItem name="Time-partitioned assets">
</TabItem>
<TabItem name="Multi-partitioned assets">
</TabItem>
</TabGroup>
```

I realize I didn't suggest this for the Snowflake reference a few weeks ago, even though I thought I did. What are your thoughts?

    return iris_data_per_day.dropna().drop_duplicates()
```

Dagster uses the `partition_expr` metadata to craft the `SELECT` statement when loading the correct partition in the downstream asset. When loading a dynamic partition, the following statement is used:

```sql
SELECT *
 WHERE [partition_expr] >= [partition_start]
   AND [partition_expr] < [partition_end]
```

When the `partition_expr` value is injected into this statement, the resulting SQL query must follow BigQuery's SQL syntax. Refer to the [BigQuery documentation](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/standard-sql/query-syntax) for more information.

When materializing the above assets, a partition must be selected, as described in [Materializing partitioned assets](/concepts/partitions-schedules-sensors/partitions#materializing-partitioned-assets). The `[partition_start]` and `[partition_end]` bounds are of the form `YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS`. In this example, the query when materializing the `2023-01-02` partition of the above assets would be:

```sql
SELECT *
 WHERE TIMESTAMP_SECONDS(time::INT) >= '2023-01-02 00:00:00'
   AND TIMESTAMP_SECONDS(time::INT) < '2023-01-03 00:00:00'
```

> In this example, the data in the **TIME** column are integers, so the `partition_expr` metadata includes a SQL statement to convert integers to timestamps. A full list of BigQuery functions can be found [here](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/standard-sql/functions-and-operators).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the data in the `TIME` column are integers, so the `partition_expr` metadata includes a SQL statement to convert integers to timestamps. A full list of BigQuery functions can be found [here](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/standard-sql/functions-and-operators).
```

Column names should be formatted using code format.

Also, in the SQL the column is `time`, but here in the copy it's in uppercase. IMO I suggest that the copy be consistent with the SQL so it's easier to make the connection.

```python file=/integrations/bigquery/multiple_io_managers.py startafter=start_example endbefore=end_example
import pandas as pd
from dagster_aws.s3.io_manager import s3_pickle_io_manager
from dagster_gcp_pandas import bigquery_pandas_io_manager

from dagster import Definitions, asset

@asset(io_manager_key="warehouse_io_manager")
def iris_data() -> pd.DataFrame:
    return pd.read_csv(
        "https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/iris/iris.data",
        names=[
            "Sepal length (cm)",
            "Sepal width (cm)",
            "Petal length (cm)",
            "Petal width (cm)",
            "Species",
        ],
    )

@asset(io_manager_key="blob_io_manager")
def iris_plots(iris_data):
    # plot_data is a function we've defined somewhere else
    # that plots the data in a DataFrame
    return plot_data(iris_data)

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[iris_data, iris_plots],
    resources={
        "warehouse_io_manager": bigquery_pandas_io_manager.configured(
            {
                "project": "my-gcp-project",
                "dataset": "IRIS",
            }
        ),
        "blob_io_manager": s3_pickle_io_manager,
    },
)
```

> In this example, the `iris_data` asset uses the I/O manager bound to the key `warehouse_io_manager` and `iris_plots` will use the I/O manager bound to the key `blob_io_manager`. In the <PyObject object="Definitions" /> object, we supply the I/O managers for those keys. When materialize these assets, the `iris_data` will get stored in BigQuery, and `iris_plots` will get saved in S3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the `iris_data` asset uses the I/O manager bound to the key `warehouse_io_manager` and `iris_plots` will use the I/O manager bound to the key `blob_io_manager`. In the <PyObject object="Definitions" /> object, we supply the I/O managers for those keys. When the assets are materialized, the `iris_data` will be stored in BigQuery, and `iris_plots` will be saved in Amazon S3.
```

            {
                "project": "my-gcp-project",
                "dataset": "IRIS",
            }
        ),
    },
)
```

</TabItem>
</TabGroup>

---

## Using Pandas and PySpark DataFrames with BigQuery

If you work with both Pandas and PySpark DataFrames and want a single I/O manager to handle storing and loading these DataFrames in BigQuery, you can construct a BigQuery I/O manager using <PyObject module="dagster_gcp" object="build_bigquery_io_manager" />:

```python file=/integrations/bigquery/pandas_and_pyspark.py startafter=start_example endbefore=end_example
from dagster_gcp import build_bigquery_io_manager
from dagster_gcp_pandas import BigQueryPandasTypeHandler
from dagster_gcp_pyspark import BigQueryPySparkTypeHandler

from dagster import Definitions

bigquery_io_manager = build_bigquery_io_manager(
    [BigQueryPandasTypeHandler(), BigQueryPySparkTypeHandler()]
)

defs = Definitions(
    assets=[iris_data, rose_data],
    resources={
        "io_manager": bigquery_io_manager.configured(
            {
                "project": "my-gcp-project",
                "data": "IRIS",
            }
        )
    },
)
```

---

> ## Executing custom SQL commands with the BigQuery Resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Executing custom SQL commands with the BigQuery resource
```
